# Data Abstraction

## Key Points

Use **data abstraction** to **hide implementation details** whenever possible.

> Data abstraction = Interface + Implementation.

**Data structures** and **procedures** are the two main strategies for
representing data types.

A process known as **defunctionalization** can be used if the implementation
language does not allow higher-order procedures.

**Algebraic data types** are great for representing **inductively defined data
types**. However, if the implementation language doesn't support them then you
can roll your own.

**Concrete syntax** is useful for humans.

**Abstract syntax** is useful for computers.

> Concrete syntax ----> Parser ----> Abstract syntax

**Parsing** gets you from concrete to abstract syntax.

## Notes

### 2.1 Specifying Data via Interfaces

Every time we decide to represent a certain set of quantities in a particular
way, we are defining a new data type: the data type whose values are those
representations and whose operations are the procedures that manipulate those
entities.

We want to **hide implementation details** whenever possible.

The most efficient representation is often a lot more difficult to implement,
so we may wish to develop a simple implementation first and only change to a
more efficient representation if it prove critical to the overall performance
of a system.

> Premature optimization is the root of all evil. &mdash;
[Donald Knuth](http://wiki.c2.com/?PrematureOptimization)

**Data abstraction = Interface + Implementation**

The interface tells us:

- What the data of the type represents.
- What the operations on the data are.
- What properties these operations may be relied on to have.

The implementation provides:

- A specific representation of the data and code for the operations.

A data type that is abstract in this way is called an **abstract data type**.
The client of the data type manipulates the new data only through the operations
specified in the interface.

**Representation independence** occurs when the client's code does not rely on
the representation of the values in the data type.

All the knowledge about how the data is represented must reside in the code of
the implementation.

The **most important part of an implementation is the specification** of how the
data is represented.

⎡v⎤ means "the representation of data v".

A specification does not dictate how a data type is to be represented.

Most interfaces will contain:

- **constructors** - they build elements of the data type.
- **observers** - they extract information from values of the data type. There
can be different types of observers. For e.g. **predicates** and **extractors**.

If the representation of a type is hidden, so it cannot be exposed by any
operation (including printing), the type is said to be **opaque**. Otherwise,
it is said to be **transparent**.

### 2.2 Representation Strategies for Data Types

When data abstraction is used, programs have the property of representation
independence. It is then possible to change the representation by redefining
the small number of procedures belonging to the interface.

This section introduces some strategies for representing data types.

Environments are used as the example.

An **environment** associates a value with each element of a finite set of
variables.

The two main strategies for representing data types:

1. Using a data structure.
2. Using procedures.

**Data Structure Representation**

**The Interpreter Recipe**

1. *Look at a piece of data.*
2. *Decide what kind of data it represents.*
3. *Extract the components of the datum and do the right thing with them.*

**Procedural Representation**

For an interface of data type that has exactly one observer we can represent
the data type by its action under the observer.

If the data being represented is a set of functions, then it can be represented
by its action under application. We can extract the interface and the procedural
representation by the following recipe:

1. Identify the lambda expressions in the client code whose evaluation yields
values of the type. Create a constructor procedure for each such lambda
expression. The parameters of the constructor procedure will be the free
variables of the lambda expression. Replace each such lambda expression in the
client code by an invocation of the corresponding constructor.

2. Define an `apply...` procedure. Identify all the places in the client code,
including the bodies of the constructor procedures, where a value of the type is
applied. Replace each such application by an invocation of the `apply...`
procedure.

If the implementation language does not allow higher-order procedures, then one
can perform the additional step of implementing the resulting interface using a
data structure representation and the interpreter recipe. This process is called
**defunctionalization**. The derivation of the data structure representation of
environments is a simple example of defunctionalization. The relation between
procedural and defunctionalized representations will be a recurring theme in
this book.

### 2.3 Interfaces for Recursive Data Types

The advice in this section doesn't currently apply since I'm using Elm which
has support for
[algebraic data types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic_data_type).

```elm
type LcExp
  = Id String
  | Lambda String LcExp
  | App LcExp LcExp
```

However, if I'm using a language that doesn't have such support then a general
recipe for designing an interface for a recursive data type is a follows:

**Designing an interface for a recursive data type**

1. *Include one constructor for each kind of data in the data type.*
2. *Include one predicate for each kind of data in the data type.*
3. *Include one extractor for each piece of data passed to a constructor of the
data type.*

### 2.4 A Tool for Defining Recursive Data Types

For complicated data types, applying the recipe for constructing an interface
can become tedious. This section introduces a tool for automatically
constructing and implementing such interfaces in Scheme.

**N.B.** *The tool is essentially equivalent to algebraic data types. But it's
nice to see how support for macros in Scheme enabled this to be possible.*

The forms `define-datatype` and `cases` provide a convenient way of defining
an inductive data type.

### 2.5 Abstract Syntax and Its Representation

A grammar usually specifies a particular representation of an inductive data
type. The representation is called **concrete syntax**, or **external**
representation.

The set of lambda calculus expressions might have used some other concrete
syntax for lambda calculus expressions. For example,

```
Lc-exp ::= Identifier
       ::= proc Identifier => Lc-exp
       ::= Lc-exp (Lc-exp)
```

In order to process such data, we need to convert it to an **internal**
representation. We call this **abstract syntax**. In the abstract syntax,
terminals such as parentheses need not be stored, because they convey no
information.

**N.B.** *Abstract syntax should store/represent only what conveys information.*

It is convenient to visualize the internal representation as an abstract syntax
tree.

**How to go from concrete syntax to abstract syntax?**

*To create an abstract syntax for a given concrete syntax, we must name each
production of the concrete syntax and each occurrence of a nonterminal in each
production.*

Concrete syntax is primarily useful for humans.

Abstract syntax is primarily useful for computers.

If the concrete syntax is a set of strings of characters, it may be a complex
undertaking to derive the corresponding abstract syntax tree. This task is
called **parsing** and is performed by a **parser**.

Writing a parser is difficult in general and it is best performed by a tool
called a **parser generator**. A parser generator takes as input a grammar and
produces a parser.

**N.B.** *Alternatively you can use parser combinators.*
